<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
			<p>Two or three weeks passed. One morning, having come to a pause in my work, I thought I would give myself a holiday, and I went to the Louvre. I wandered about looking at the pictures I knew so well, and let my fancy play idly with the emotions they suggested. I sauntered into the long gallery, and there suddenly saw Stroeve. I smiled, for his appearance, so rotund and yet so startled, could never fail to excite a smile, and then as I came nearer I noticed that he seemed singularly disconsolate. He looked woebegone and yet ridiculous, like a man who has fallen into the water with all his clothes on, and, being rescued from death, frightened still, feels that he only looks a fool. Turning round, he stared at me, but I perceived that he did not see me. His round blue eyes looked harassed behind his glasses.</p>
			<p>“Stroeve,” I said.</p>
			<p>He gave a little start, and then smiled, but his smile was rueful.</p>
			<p>“Why are you idling in this disgraceful fashion?” I asked gaily.</p>
			<p>“It’s a long time since I was at the Louvre. I thought I’d come and see if they had anything new.”</p>
			<p>“But you told me you had to get a picture finished this week.”</p>
			<p>“Strickland’s painting in my studio.”</p>
			<p>“Well?”</p>
			<p>“I suggested it myself. He’s not strong enough to go back to his own place yet. I thought we could both paint there. Lots of fellows in the Quarter share a studio. I thought it would be fun. I’ve always thought it would be jolly to have someone to talk to when one was tired of work.”</p>
			<p>He said all this slowly, detaching statement from statement with a little awkward silence, and he kept his kind, foolish eyes fixed on mine. They were full of tears.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think I understand,” I said.</p>
			<p>“Strickland can’t work with anyone else in the studio.”</p>
			<p>“Damn it all, it’s your studio. That’s his lookout.”</p>
			<p>He looked at me pitifully. His lips were trembling.</p>
			<p>“What happened?” I asked, rather sharply.</p>
			<p>He hesitated and flushed. He glanced unhappily at one of the pictures on the wall.</p>
			<p>“He wouldn’t let me go on painting. He told me to get out.”</p>
			<p>“But why didn’t you tell him to go to hell?”</p>
			<p>“He turned me out. I couldn’t very well struggle with him. He threw my hat after me, and locked the door.”</p>
			<p>I was furious with Strickland, and was indignant with myself, because Dirk Stroeve cut such an absurd figure that I felt inclined to laugh.</p>
			<p>“But what did your wife say?”</p>
			<p>“She’d gone out to do the marketing.”</p>
			<p>“Is he going to let her in?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>I gazed at Stroeve with perplexity. He stood like a schoolboy with whom a master is finding fault.</p>
			<p>“Shall I get rid of Strickland for you?” I asked.</p>
			<p>He gave a little start, and his shining face grew very red.</p>
			<p>“No. You’d better not do anything.”</p>
			<p>He nodded to me and walked away. It was clear that for some reason he did not want to discuss the matter. I did not understand.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
